\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename codex.info
@settitle codex.el: Emacs integration for OpenAI Codex CLI
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Codex: (codex).       Emacs integration for OpenAI Codex CLI.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title codex.el: Emacs integration for OpenAI Codex CLI
@author Pablo Stafforini (@email{pablo@@stafforini.com})
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top codex.el: Emacs integration for OpenAI Codex CLI

This manual describes the features and customization options for the Emacs Lisp file @samp{codex.el}.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* User options::
* Commands::
* Functions::
* Transient menus::
* Keymap::
* Minor mode::
* Hooks system::
* Indices::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

User options

* Core settings::
* Sandbox and approval::
* Model and profile::
* Hooks integration::
* Background and contrast remapping::
* Notifications::
* Window management::
* Images::
* Emacs hooks::
* Eat terminal settings::
* Vterm terminal settings::

Background and contrast remapping

* Why is this a post-hoc remap instead of a clean fix?::

Commands

* Session management::
* Sending commands and context::
* TUI key sequences::
* Buffer and window management::
* Model and permissions::
* Diagnostics::

Functions

* Notification functions::
* Hook handling::

Indices

* Function index::
* Variable index::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview

@samp{codex.el} provides an Emacs interface to the @uref{https://github.com/openai/codex, OpenAI Codex CLI}, allowing you to interact with the Codex agent directly from within Emacs.  The package is modeled after @samp{claude-code.el} and shares a similar architecture and design philosophy.

The package embeds the Codex CLI inside an Emacs terminal emulator buffer (either @samp{eat} or @samp{vterm}), giving you a full-featured TUI experience without leaving your editor.  You can start, stop, and manage multiple Codex instances across different projects, send commands and code from any buffer, toggle the Codex window on and off, and access all of the CLI's slash commands through a transient menu.

The main capabilities of @samp{codex.el} can be grouped thematically:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Session management} --- start Codex in the current project, resume or fork previous sessions, run multiple named instances side by side, and kill instances individually or all at once.
@item
@strong{Sending commands and context} --- send freeform commands, send commands annotated with file and line context, send the active region or entire buffer, send file paths and images, and ask Codex to fix errors at point.
@item
@strong{TUI interaction} --- send return, escape, and numeric responses to the Codex TUI; queue follow-up prompts; edit previous messages; inject mid-turn instructions; open the header search overlay; and display prompt autosuggestions with a distinct face.
@item
@strong{Window and buffer management} --- toggle the Codex window, switch between instances, select from all running instances, and toggle read-only mode.
@item
@strong{Hooks and notifications} --- auto-configure the Codex CLI hooks system so that Emacs receives lifecycle events (session start, tool use, permission requests, stop); trigger desktop notifications when Codex finishes and awaits input.
@item
@strong{Transient menus} --- a main command menu and a slash commands menu, both accessible from the keyboard.
@item
@strong{Model and configuration} --- change the model, reasoning effort, sandbox mode, approval policy, and profile on the fly through transient infixes.
@end itemize

The package requires Emacs 28.1 or later, @samp{transient} 0.9.3 or later, @samp{inheritenv}, and @samp{eat}.  The default terminal backend is @samp{eat}.  You can alternatively use @samp{vterm} by installing it separately and setting @code{codex-terminal-backend} to @code{vterm}.

The development repository is on @uref{https://github.com/benthamite/codex, GitHub}.

@node User options
@chapter User options

@menu
* Core settings::
* Sandbox and approval::
* Model and profile::
* Hooks integration::
* Background and contrast remapping::
* Notifications::
* Window management::
* Images::
* Emacs hooks::
* Eat terminal settings::
* Vterm terminal settings::
@end menu

@node Core settings
@section Core settings

@vindex codex-program
@vindex codex-program-switches
@vindex codex-terminal-backend
@vindex codex-use-alt-screen
@vindex codex-disable-terminal-resize-reflow
@vindex codex-term-name
@vindex codex-startup-delay
@vindex codex-confirm-kill
@vindex codex-newline-keybinding-style
@vindex codex-enable-prompt-autosuggestions
@vindex codex-prompt-autosuggestion-placeholders
@vindex codex-prompt-autosuggestion-history-path
@vindex codex-prompt-autosuggestion-history-limit

The user option @code{codex-program} specifies the path to the Codex binary.  The default value is @code{"codex"}, which relies on the binary being in your @code{PATH}.  Change this if you have installed Codex to a non-standard location.

The user option @code{codex-program-switches} is a list of extra CLI flags to pass to Codex on every invocation.  The default value is @code{nil}.  Use this for flags that you always want applied but that are not covered by the dedicated user options below.

The user option @code{codex-terminal-backend} selects which terminal emulator to use for the Codex REPL@.  The choices are @code{eat} (the default) and @code{vterm}.  The @samp{eat} backend is recommended as it integrates more cleanly with Emacs and does not require compiling a dynamic module.

The user option @code{codex-use-alt-screen} controls whether Codex runs in its default alternate-screen TUI mode.  The default is @code{nil}, so codex.el starts Codex with @code{--no-alt-screen} for inline scrollback mode.  This avoids recurring stale-screen failures seen when Codex's alternate-screen TUI and Emacs terminal buffers lose synchronization after interrupts, prompt editing, or heavy redraws.  Set it to non-nil only if you explicitly want Codex's alt-screen TUI@.

The user option @code{codex-disable-terminal-resize-reflow} controls whether codex.el passes @code{--disable terminal_resize_reflow} to new Codex sessions.  The default is @code{t} because Codex's experimental terminal reflow rebuilds scrollback after width changes, while Emacs terminal buffers use the buffer itself as retained session history.  Disable this option only if you prefer Codex's own terminal reflow behavior.

The user option @code{codex-term-name} overrides the terminal type reported to Codex.  The default is @code{nil}, meaning codex.el chooses a backend-appropriate @code{TERM} value.  For @samp{eat}, Codex buffers use Eat's bundled @samp{eat-*} terminfo even if the global @samp{eat-term-name} has been customized; for @samp{vterm}, Codex buffers keep vterm's own default.  Set this to a string such as @code{"xterm-256color"} only when your terminal environment requires a specific @code{TERM} value.  The value is applied when the terminal subprocess starts, so changes affect new Codex buffers rather than already-running sessions.

In @samp{eat} buffers, codex.el disables Eat shell integration for the Codex subprocess and ignores Eat's private UI-command channel in the outer terminal, including in existing Codex buffers after codex.el is reloaded.  Codex is itself a TUI that captures and re-renders tool output; if nested shell commands emit Eat-private OSC sequences, those sequences can leak into captured tool output and corrupt the outer terminal display.

In @samp{eat} Codex buffers, codex.el also coalesces terminal output chunks that end in the middle of a CSI escape sequence.  This protects Codex sessions from a known failure mode where the CLI emits a cursor-shape sequence such as @samp{ESC [ 0 SPC q} across two process-output chunks and Eat tries to parse the incomplete first half as a complete sequence.

The user option @code{codex-startup-delay} is a number of seconds to wait after starting the Codex process before displaying the buffer.  The default is @code{0.1}.  Increasing this value can help fix terminal layout issues that occur when the buffer is displayed before Codex has fully initialized.

The user option @code{codex-confirm-kill} controls whether @code{codex-kill} and @code{codex-kill-all} ask for confirmation before killing instances.  The default is @code{t}.  Set it to @code{nil} if you prefer to kill instances without a prompt.

The user option @code{codex-newline-keybinding-style} controls how the return key behaves in Codex buffers.  The default, @code{newline-on-shift-return}, makes @code{S-RET} insert a line break and plain @code{RET} submit the prompt, mirroring the behavior of @samp{claude-code.el}.  The other choices are @code{newline-on-alt-return} (@code{M-RET} for newline, @code{RET} to submit), @code{shift-return-to-send} (@code{RET} for newline, @code{S-RET} to submit), and @code{super-return-to-send} (@code{RET} for newline, @code{s-RET} — the COMMAND key on macOS — to submit).  The line-break action is delivered to Codex as @code{Ctrl+J} (byte @code{0x0A}), which the Codex CLI binds to its @code{insert_newline} editor action by default; submission is delivered as a plain @code{Return}.

In @samp{eat} buffers, plain Return is dispatched as the same @samp{RET} character event
used by normal terminal input; Escape also goes through Eat's key-event input
path rather than raw string insertion.  This keeps programmatic TUI actions
aligned with real keypresses.

The user option @code{codex-enable-prompt-autosuggestions} controls whether @samp{codex.el} styles prompt autosuggestions in @samp{eat} buffers.  The default is @code{t}.  Codex renders placeholder and suggestion text after the terminal cursor; when that text arrives in Emacs without the CLI's dim styling, @samp{codex.el} recognizes known suggestions and applies @code{codex-prompt-autosuggestion-face}, which inherits @code{shadow} without forcing italic text.  While an autosuggestion is visible, @samp{codex.el} keeps point at the prompt cursor rather than the footer line that Codex renders below the prompt.  The options @code{codex-prompt-autosuggestion-placeholders}, @code{codex-prompt-autosuggestion-history-path}, and @code{codex-prompt-autosuggestion-history-limit} control which built-in placeholder strings and recent history entries are recognized as autosuggestions.  In @samp{eat} Codex buffers, @samp{TAB} first accepts the visible autosuggestion when there is one; otherwise it is sent through to the Codex TUI as a normal tab.

@node Sandbox and approval
@section Sandbox and approval

@vindex codex-sandbox-mode
@vindex codex-approval-policy
@vindex codex-full-auto

The user option @code{codex-sandbox-mode} controls the sandboxing level for Codex.  When @code{nil} (the default), the CLI's own default is used.  The other choices are @code{read-only}, @code{workspace-write}, and @code{danger-full-access}, which correspond to the CLI's @code{--sandbox} flag values.  This option is ignored when @code{codex-full-auto} is non-nil.

The user option @code{codex-approval-policy} sets the approval policy for tool use.  When @code{nil} (the default), the CLI default applies.  The choices are @code{untrusted}, @code{on-request}, and @code{never}, corresponding to the @code{--ask-for-approval} flag.  This option is also ignored when @code{codex-full-auto} is non-nil.

The user option @code{codex-full-auto} enables fully autonomous mode by passing @code{--dangerously-bypass-approvals-and-sandbox} to Codex.  The default is @code{nil}.  When non-nil, this overrides both @code{codex-sandbox-mode} and @code{codex-approval-policy}.  Use with caution.

@node Model and profile
@section Model and profile

@vindex codex-model
@vindex codex-profile
@vindex codex-reasoning-effort

The user option @code{codex-model} specifies a model override (e.g., @code{"gpt-5.4"}).  The default is @code{nil}, which uses the CLI's default model.

The user option @code{codex-profile} names a configuration profile.  The default is @code{nil}, meaning the CLI default profile is used.  Profiles allow you to maintain separate sets of configuration for different workflows.

The user option @code{codex-reasoning-effort} overrides the reasoning effort level.  The default is @code{nil}.  When set to a string value, it is passed via @code{-c} as the @code{model_reasoning_effort} configuration value.

@node Hooks integration
@section Hooks integration

@vindex codex-enable-hooks
@vindex codex-hooks-config-path
@vindex codex-hooks-json-path
@vindex codex-emacsclient-program

The user option @code{codex-enable-hooks} controls whether @samp{codex.el} automatically configures the Codex CLI hooks system.  The default is @code{t}.  When enabled, activating @code{codex-mode} ensures that @code{config.toml} has @code{codex_hooks = true} under @code{[features]} and that @code{hooks.json} contains entries for all supported hook types.

The user option @code{codex-hooks-config-path} is the path to the Codex @code{config.toml} file.  The default is @code{"~/.codex/config.toml"}.

The user option @code{codex-hooks-json-path} is the path to the Codex @code{hooks.json} file.  The default is @code{"~/.codex/hooks.json"}.

The user option @code{codex-emacsclient-program} specifies the @samp{emacsclient} executable used by the hook wrapper.  The default is @code{nil}, meaning @samp{codex.el} records the first @samp{emacsclient} found in @code{PATH} when hooks are configured.

@node Background and contrast remapping
@section Background and contrast remapping

@vindex codex-remap-light-backgrounds
@vindex codex-card-background
@vindex codex-background-contrast-threshold
@vindex codex-minimum-contrast-ratio

The Codex CLI has its own theme system, and the colors it emits do not always match the Emacs theme.  Mismatches make terminal text unreadable in two directions: the CLI may paint light backgrounds on a dark Emacs theme (bright rectangles containing dark text), or dark backgrounds on a light Emacs theme (dark rectangles containing light text).  A third kind of mismatch is low-contrast foreground colors that wash out against the effective background (e.g. bright cyan on a light default background, or dark red on a dark diff background).  The remapping system runs after each batch of terminal output and addresses all three.

The user option @code{codex-remap-light-backgrounds} is the master switch.  The default is @code{t}.  When non-nil, background colors whose WCAG contrast against the Emacs default background exceeds @code{codex-background-contrast-threshold} are stripped (or replaced), and --- when @code{codex-minimum-contrast-ratio} is also non-nil --- low-contrast foregrounds are stripped as well.

The user option @code{codex-card-background} specifies the replacement color for clashing backgrounds.  When @code{nil} (the default), clashing backgrounds are stripped entirely so the Emacs buffer background shows through.  Set this to a color string (e.g. @code{"#1a1b2e"}) to use a fixed replacement color instead.

The user option @code{codex-background-contrast-threshold} is a WCAG contrast ratio above which a CLI background is considered to clash with the Emacs theme.  The default is @code{1.0}, which strips any explicit background that is not identical to the Emacs default background --- the cleanest result for users who want the Emacs theme to fully own the rendering.  Codex's diff foregrounds (colored @code{+} / @code{-} glyphs) still distinguish added and removed lines after the bg strip.  Raise this to @code{3.0} (the WCAG AA threshold for large text) to preserve subtle low-contrast tints (e.g. light-green diff backgrounds on a light theme at contrast @code{1.04:1}) and only strip clashing rectangles.  Because the comparison is against the Emacs default background, the same threshold handles mismatches in either direction.

The user option @code{codex-minimum-contrast-ratio} is a WCAG contrast ratio below which the explicit foreground is stripped so the Emacs theme's default foreground takes over.  The default is @code{3.0}.  Set this to @code{nil} to disable contrast-based foreground remapping while keeping background remapping.  Stripping the foreground rather than the background preserves the semantic tint of diff-added and diff-removed backgrounds while ensuring the text itself remains readable.

Because the remapping pass runs after every batch of terminal output, it only inspects the current eat display plus newly appended output since the previous pass, not the full retained scrollback.  Perceived luminance results are also memoized in @code{codex--color-luminance-cache} — a process-wide hash table keyed by color string.  The cache is small (one entry per distinct color) and is preserved across reloads of the package, so repeated contrast comparisons reduce to O(1) hash lookups instead of repeated @code{color-name-to-rgb} calls.

@menu
* Why is this a post-hoc remap instead of a clean fix?::
@end menu

@node Why is this a post-hoc remap instead of a clean fix?
@subsection Why is this a post-hoc remap instead of a clean fix?

This feature exists because the Codex CLI emits 24-bit RGB escape codes for card backgrounds and some foregrounds.  Those land as literal @code{:foreground} / @code{:background} text properties in the eat buffer, bypassing the Emacs face system entirely — there is no indirection point where the Emacs theme gets to participate.

The clean alternative would be to downgrade Codex to 256-color (which eat routes through @code{eat-term-color-*} faces that the Emacs theme already controls).  That was attempted by setting @code{COLORTERM=} (empty) in the Codex subprocess environment.  It did not work: Codex's Rust UI code calls @code{Color::Rgb(...)} directly in several places (chat composer, diff blocks), bypassing its own @code{stdout_color_level()} detection.  No env var or config key currently turns those call sites off, and @code{NO_COLOR=1} is too aggressive (it disables all color).

This machinery should be revisited and deleted if Codex stops hardcoding @code{Color::Rgb} in its UI code, grows a config option to use the terminal palette, or starts honoring @code{COLORTERM} consistently.  To verify: start a fresh Codex session and check whether the buffer contains literal @code{#RRGGBB} hex colors in its face text properties — if all colors route through @code{eat-term-color-*} faces, this whole section can go.

@node Notifications
@section Notifications

@vindex codex-enable-notifications
@vindex codex-notification-function

The user option @code{codex-enable-notifications} controls whether notifications are shown when Codex finishes a task and is waiting for input.  The default is @code{t}.  Notifications are triggered by bell characters from the terminal or by @code{Stop} hook events.

The user option @code{codex-notification-function} specifies the function called for notifications.  The function receives two arguments: a title string and a message string.  The default is @code{codex-default-notification}, which displays a message in the echo area and pulses the mode line (@ref{Notification functions}).

@node Window management
@section Window management

@vindex codex-no-delete-other-windows
@vindex codex-toggle-auto-select
@vindex codex-optimize-window-resize
@vindex codex-display-window-fn

The user option @code{codex-no-delete-other-windows} prevents Codex windows from being deleted by @code{delete-other-windows}.  The default is @code{nil}.  Set this to @code{t} if you want the Codex window to persist when you use @samp{C-x 1} or similar commands.

The user option @code{codex-toggle-auto-select} controls whether @code{codex-toggle} automatically selects the Codex window after opening it.  The default is @code{nil}, meaning the window is displayed but focus stays in the current window.

The user option @code{codex-optimize-window-resize} controls whether terminal reflows are suppressed when the window size has not changed.  The default is @code{t}.  This avoids redundant redraws while still keeping the terminal dimensions synchronized after width or height changes.

The user option @code{codex-display-window-fn} specifies the function used to display the Codex window.  It must accept a buffer argument.  The default is @code{codex-display-buffer-same-window}, which displays the Codex buffer in the current window.  An alternative @code{codex-display-buffer-below} is also provided, which displays it below the currently selected window.

@node Images
@section Images

@vindex codex-default-images

The user option @code{codex-default-images} is a list of image file paths to attach at startup via the @code{--image} flag.  The default is @code{nil}.  Use this to always include certain screenshots or diagrams as context.

@node Emacs hooks
@section Emacs hooks

@vindex codex-start-hook
@vindex codex-process-environment-functions
@vindex codex-event-hook
@vindex codex-transcript-catch-up-on-stop
@vindex codex-transcript-sessions-directory

The hook @code{codex-start-hook} runs after a Codex instance starts.  Use it to perform additional setup in the Codex buffer, such as enabling minor modes or customizing keybindings.

The abnormal hook @code{codex-process-environment-functions} lets you inject environment variables into the Codex process.  Each function receives two arguments: the Codex buffer name and the project directory.  Each function should return a list of strings in @code{"VAR=VALUE"} format.

The hook @code{codex-event-hook} runs when the Codex CLI triggers lifecycle events through the hooks system.  This is an abnormal hook: functions are called with a single plist argument containing @code{:type}, @code{:buffer-name}, @code{:json-data}, and @code{:args}, and dispatch stops at the first non-nil return value.  That value is returned to the Codex CLI hook process, which lets permission and tool hooks approve, deny, or block.

The user option @code{codex-transcript-catch-up-on-stop} controls whether Stop hooks repair stale terminal output from Codex JSONL transcripts.  The default is @code{nil} because automatic repair can be visually disruptive in active terminal buffers; reloading from an older build also resets the old implicit default to @code{nil} unless you customized the option explicitly.  When enabled, @code{codex.el} tracks the session id from hook JSON, finds the transcript under @code{codex-transcript-sessions-directory}, and appends the final agent message if the terminal buffer does not already contain it.  Prefer calling @code{codex-refresh-from-transcript} explicitly when repairing a known stale buffer.

@node Eat terminal settings
@section Eat terminal settings

@vindex codex-eat-read-only-mode-cursor-type
@vindex codex-eat-disable-cursor-blink
@vindex codex-eat-scrollback-size
@vindex codex-eat-preserve-scrollback

The user option @code{codex-eat-read-only-mode-cursor-type} specifies the cursor appearance when the eat terminal is in read-only mode.  The value is a list of the form @code{(CURSOR-ON BLINKING-FREQUENCY CURSOR-OFF)}.  The default is @code{(box nil nil)}, which shows a non-blinking filled box cursor.

The user option @code{codex-eat-disable-cursor-blink} controls whether Codex @samp{eat} buffers map blinking terminal cursor states to non-blinking equivalents.  The default is @code{t}.  This keeps the terminal cursor visible while avoiding Eat's graphical cursor blink timer, which redraws the whole frame and can flicker on macOS@.  Set this to @code{nil} if you want Codex to honor blinking cursor states exactly as emitted by the CLI@.

The user option @code{codex-eat-scrollback-size} controls how much scrollback eat keeps for Codex buffers.  The default is @code{nil}, meaning unlimited scrollback.  This avoids losing earlier Codex output in long sessions; set it to a number of characters if you want a bounded buffer.

The user option @code{codex-eat-preserve-scrollback} controls whether Codex @samp{eat} buffers strip CSI scrollback erase commands before Eat processes output.  The default is @code{t}.  Codex runs with @code{--no-alt-screen} by default so the Emacs buffer can serve as session history, but TUI redraws can still emit scrollback erase sequences that make Eat delete retained buffer text.  Ordinary erase-below redraw commands still pass through so prompt menus and status areas can clear stale text.

The package also defines faces for the eat terminal that inherit from the corresponding @samp{eat} faces: @code{codex-eat-prompt-annotation-running-face}, @code{codex-eat-prompt-annotation-success-face}, @code{codex-eat-prompt-annotation-failure-face}, @code{codex-eat-term-bold-face}, @code{codex-eat-term-faint-face}, @code{codex-eat-term-italic-face}, @code{codex-eat-term-slow-blink-face}, @code{codex-eat-term-fast-blink-face}, and font faces @code{codex-eat-term-font-0-face} through @code{codex-eat-term-font-9-face}.  Customize these faces if you want the Codex terminal to look different from other eat buffers.

@node Vterm terminal settings
@section Vterm terminal settings

@vindex codex-vterm-buffer-multiline-output
@vindex codex-vterm-multiline-delay
@vindex codex-vterm-max-scrollback

The user option @code{codex-vterm-buffer-multiline-output} controls whether multi-line terminal output is buffered to prevent flickering.  The default is @code{t}.  When enabled, rapid successive output chunks containing cursor movement sequences are accumulated and flushed as a single update.

The user option @code{codex-vterm-multiline-delay} sets the delay (in seconds) before processing buffered vterm output.  The default is @code{0.01}.  Increase this if you still see flickering with the buffering enabled.

The user option @code{codex-vterm-max-scrollback} controls how many scrollback lines vterm keeps for Codex buffers.  The default is @code{100000}, which is vterm's built-in maximum unless its native module is recompiled with a larger limit.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@menu
* Session management::
* Sending commands and context::
* TUI key sequences::
* Buffer and window management::
* Model and permissions::
* Diagnostics::
@end menu

@node Session management
@section Session management

@findex codex
@findex codex-start-in-directory
@findex codex-resume
@findex codex-fork
@findex codex-new-instance
@findex codex-kill
@findex codex-kill-all

The command @code{codex} starts a Codex instance in the current project root or, if not in a project, in the directory of the current file.  If a Codex instance is already running for that directory, you are prompted for an instance name so that multiple instances can coexist.  With a single prefix argument (@samp{C-u}), the cursor switches to the Codex buffer after starting.  With a double prefix argument (@samp{C-u C-u}), you are prompted for the project directory.

The command @code{codex-start-in-directory} always prompts for a directory before starting Codex, regardless of the current project.  With a prefix argument, it also switches to the Codex buffer.

The command @code{codex-resume} resumes a previous Codex session by running @code{codex resume}.  If other instances already exist for the directory, you are prompted for an instance name; otherwise the name defaults to @samp{"default"}.  With a prefix argument, it passes @code{--last} to resume the most recent session.

The command @code{codex-fork} forks a previous session by running @code{codex fork}.  Like @code{codex-resume}, it only prompts for an instance name when other instances exist, and accepts a prefix argument for @code{--last}.

The command @code{codex-new-instance} creates a new Codex instance and always prompts for an instance name, even if no other instances are running.  This is useful when you want to name your instance from the start.  It accepts the same prefix argument conventions as @code{codex}.

The command @code{codex-kill} kills the Codex instance associated with the current directory.  If multiple instances are running for the directory, you are prompted to select one.  If @code{codex-confirm-kill} is non-nil (the default), confirmation is required.

The command @code{codex-kill-all} kills all Codex instances across all directories.  It reports the number of instances killed and, like @code{codex-kill}, respects the @code{codex-confirm-kill} setting.

@node Sending commands and context
@section Sending commands and context

@findex codex-send-command
@findex codex-send-command-with-context
@findex codex-send-region
@findex codex-send-buffer-file
@findex codex-send-image
@findex codex-fix-error-at-point

The command @code{codex-send-command} reads a command from the minibuffer and sends it to the Codex instance for the current project.  Input history is maintained in @code{codex-command-history}.  With a prefix argument, the cursor switches to the Codex buffer after sending.

Programmatic callers that already know the target session can use the same
terminal ordering through @code{codex--send-command-to-buffer}.  It types the
command into that specific Codex buffer, selects the buffer's window, then
submits it by calling @code{codex--terminal-send-return} interactively.  Dollar
commands trigger Codex's skill completion UI, so they receive the additional
Return events needed to accept the skill completion and submit the resulting
prompt.

The command @code{codex-send-command-with-context} works like @code{codex-send-command} but appends a file reference (in @code{@@file:line} format) to the command.  If a region is active, it includes the line range of the region.  This is particularly useful when you want to direct Codex's attention to a specific location in your code.

The command @code{codex-send-region} sends the active region to Codex, or the entire buffer if no region is active.  With a single prefix argument, it prompts for instructions to prepend to the text.  With a double prefix argument, it also switches to the Codex buffer.

The command @code{codex-send-buffer-file} sends the file path of the current buffer to Codex, prefixed with @code{@@}.  This tells Codex to read the file.  With a prefix argument, it prompts for instructions to include alongside the file reference.  With a double prefix argument, it also switches to the Codex buffer.

The command @code{codex-send-image} prompts for an image file and sends its path to Codex prefixed with @code{@@}.  Use this to attach screenshots or diagrams as context for your request.

The command @code{codex-fix-error-at-point} examines the error at point (using Flycheck or @code{help-at-pt}), formats it with the file and line reference, and sends it to Codex with instructions to fix the error.  With a prefix argument, it switches to the Codex buffer.

@node TUI key sequences
@section TUI key sequences

@findex codex-send-return
@findex codex-send-escape
@findex codex-previous-agent
@findex codex-next-agent
@findex codex-edit-previous-message
@findex codex-queue-followup
@findex codex-inject-mid-turn
@findex codex-header-search
@findex codex-accept-prompt-autosuggestion
@findex codex-send-1
@findex codex-send-2
@findex codex-send-3

These commands send specific key sequences to the Codex TUI, allowing you to interact with Codex without switching to the terminal buffer.

The command @code{codex-send-return} sends a return key press.  This is equivalent to pressing @samp{Enter} in the Codex TUI and is often used to confirm actions.

The command @code{codex-send-escape} sends an escape key press, typically used to cancel or dismiss prompts.  In eat buffers, @samp{C-g} is also bound to this command.

The commands @code{codex-previous-agent} and @code{codex-next-agent} send Codex's agent-navigation key sequences.  In terminal buffers, @samp{M-<left>} and @samp{M-<right>} are bound to these commands so multi-agent sessions can switch between the main thread and subagent threads when Codex accepts agent navigation.

The command @code{codex-edit-previous-message} sends @samp{Esc Esc} to walk back and edit the previous message.  After sending the sequence, it switches to the Codex buffer so you can edit inline.

The command @code{codex-queue-followup} sends a @samp{Tab} key press to queue a follow-up prompt while Codex is still working.

The command @code{codex-inject-mid-turn} sends a @samp{Return} key press to inject instructions while Codex is in the middle of processing.

The command @code{codex-header-search} sends @samp{Ctrl+K} to open the header search overlay in the Codex TUI@.

The command @code{codex-accept-prompt-autosuggestion} accepts the visible prompt autosuggestion in an @samp{eat} Codex buffer by sending only the suggested suffix to the terminal.  It returns non-nil when it accepted a suggestion, which lets @samp{TAB} handlers use it before falling back to a raw tab for Codex's own queue/submit behavior.

The commands @code{codex-send-1}, @code{codex-send-2}, and @code{codex-send-3} send the corresponding digit to the Codex TUI@.  These are useful for selecting numbered options in menus.

@node Buffer and window management
@section Buffer and window management

@findex codex-toggle
@findex codex-switch-to-buffer
@findex codex-select-buffer
@findex codex-toggle-read-only-mode

The command @code{codex-toggle} shows or hides the Codex window.  If the Codex buffer is currently visible and another window exists, it deletes the Codex window; if the Codex window is the only window, it buries the buffer instead.  If the buffer is hidden, it displays it using @code{codex-display-window-fn}.  The @code{codex-no-delete-other-windows} parameter is applied to the window.  If @code{codex-toggle-auto-select} is non-nil, focus moves to the Codex window when it is shown (@ref{Window management}).

The command @code{codex-switch-to-buffer} switches to the Codex buffer for the current project.  If multiple instances are running, you are prompted to select one.  With a prefix argument, it shows all Codex instances across all directories.

The command @code{codex-select-buffer} prompts you to select from all running Codex instances across all directories and switches to the selected one.

The command @code{codex-toggle-read-only-mode} toggles the terminal between read-only mode and interactive mode.  In read-only mode (eat's Emacs mode or vterm's copy mode), you can navigate and copy text using normal Emacs keybindings.  In interactive mode, keystrokes are sent to the terminal.

@node Model and permissions
@section Model and permissions

@findex codex-cycle-permissions

The command @code{codex-cycle-permissions} sends @samp{/permissions} to the Codex TUI to cycle through approval modes.

@node Diagnostics
@section Diagnostics

@findex codex-diagnose-faces-at-point
@findex codex-diagnose-faces-in-region
@findex codex-redraw

When the Codex buffer displays rendering artifacts --- such as colored rectangles with invisible text --- these diagnostic commands help identify the root cause by inspecting the face properties that the terminal emulator has applied.

The command @code{codex-diagnose-faces-at-point} reports the face plist at point, including the explicit and effective foreground and background colors, the WCAG contrast ratio between them, the @code{:inherit} chain, and whether the background remapping system would process this span.  Run this with point on a visually corrupted region to see whether the issue is a low-contrast color combination, a missing foreground, or a background that falls below the remapping threshold (@ref{Background and contrast remapping, , Background color remapping}).

The command @code{codex-diagnose-faces-in-region} audits all face property spans between BEG and END, reporting any non-whitespace text with a contrast ratio below 3:1.  With no active region, it audits the visible portion of the buffer.  The output lists the line number, contrast ratio, foreground, background, and a text excerpt for each problematic span.

The command @code{codex-redraw} asks the Codex TUI to repaint and then forces the Emacs terminal backend to redisplay.  It is bound to @code{C-l} in Codex buffers and to @code{l} in @code{codex-command-map}.  This is mainly a recovery command for existing or explicitly opted-in alt-screen sessions; new sessions avoid that failure class by default because @code{codex-use-alt-screen} is nil.

@node Functions
@chapter Functions

@menu
* Notification functions::
* Hook handling::
@end menu

@node Notification functions
@section Notification functions

@findex codex-default-notification
@findex codex-display-buffer-same-window
@findex codex-display-buffer-below

The function @code{codex-default-notification} is the default notification handler.  It takes a title and message, displays them in the echo area, and pulses the mode line three times.  You can replace this by setting @code{codex-notification-function} to a custom function, for example one that uses @samp{alert.el} or the system notification center (@ref{Notifications}).

The function @code{codex-display-buffer-same-window} displays the Codex buffer in the current window using @code{display-buffer-same-window}.  It is the default value of @code{codex-display-window-fn} (@ref{Window management}).

The function @code{codex-display-buffer-below} displays the Codex buffer below the currently selected window using @code{display-buffer-below-selected}.

@node Hook handling
@section Hook handling

@findex codex-handle-hook
@findex codex-handle-hook-from-emacsclient
@findex codex-refresh-from-transcript

The hook path has two stages.  The @samp{codex-hook-wrapper} shell script is the command recorded in @samp{hooks.json}; it reads the hook JSON on standard input, writes that JSON to a private temporary file, and calls @code{codex-handle-hook-from-emacsclient} via @samp{emacsclient} targeted at the Emacs server that configured the hooks.  The wrapper retries transient @samp{emacsclient} socket failures briefly; if dispatch still fails, gatekeeping hook types such as @samp{PreToolUse} and @samp{PermissionRequest} fail closed.  The argv protocol after the hook type and buffer name is @samp{json-file JSON-FILE response-file RESPONSE-FILE ...}, so large or sensitive hook JSON does not travel through argv and Emacs can write a hook response back to the wrapper.  Hook installation also replaces older @samp{notify-emacs-hook.sh} entries so stale wrappers cannot feed hook JSON back to Codex as terminal input.

The function @code{codex-handle-hook-from-emacsclient} parses that protocol from @code{server-eval-args-left} and delegates to @code{codex-handle-hook}.  Direct Elisp callers can call @code{codex-handle-hook} with a hook type (e.g., @code{"Stop"}, @code{"PreToolUse"}), a buffer name, hook JSON data, and optional additional arguments.  It constructs a plist and runs @code{codex-event-hook} with it until the first handler returns non-nil.  Hooks marked for notification, currently @code{"Stop"}, also trigger a notification (@ref{Notifications}).

Before user hook handlers run, @code{codex-handle-hook} also updates the target buffer's transcript metadata.  On Stop events it can call @code{codex-refresh-from-transcript} internally, so a stale terminal buffer still shows the final recorded agent message.

@node Transient menus
@chapter Transient menus

@findex codex-transient
@findex codex-slash-commands

@samp{codex.el} provides two transient menus for convenient access to its commands.

The transient @code{codex-transient} is the main command menu (titled ``Codex Menu''), organized into five columns: Start/Stop Codex, Send Commands, Manage Codex, Quick Responses, and Model & Config.  The Model & Config column contains transient infixes that let you change @code{codex-model}, @code{codex-reasoning-effort}, @code{codex-sandbox-mode}, @code{codex-approval-policy}, and @code{codex-profile} on the fly without modifying your configuration.  These infixes use two-key sequences prefixed with @samp{g} (e.g. @samp{g m} for model, @samp{g e} for reasoning effort, @samp{g s} for sandbox mode, @samp{g a} for approval policy, @samp{g p} for profile).

The transient @code{codex-slash-commands} provides quick access to all Codex CLI slash commands, organized into five groups: Core (help, clear, compact, status, new, quit), Navigation & Review (diff, review, fork, resume, copy), Configuration (permissions, model, fast, plan, init, statusline, theme, debug config), Features & Tools (experimental, MCP, agent, apps, mention, ps), and Account & Identity (logout, personality, feedback).

Both transients are available from the @code{codex-command-map} keymap, bound to @samp{m} and @samp{/} respectively.

@node Keymap
@chapter Keymap

The @code{codex-command-map} keymap provides quick access to all commands.  You should bind this map to a prefix key of your choice, for example:

@lisp
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c x") codex-command-map)
@end lisp

The default bindings are:

@multitable {aaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{c}
@tab @code{codex}
@item @samp{d}
@tab @code{codex-start-in-directory}
@item @samp{R}
@tab @code{codex-resume}
@item @samp{f}
@tab @code{codex-fork}
@item @samp{i}
@tab @code{codex-new-instance}
@item @samp{k}
@tab @code{codex-kill}
@item @samp{K}
@tab @code{codex-kill-all}
@item @samp{s}
@tab @code{codex-send-command}
@item @samp{x}
@tab @code{codex-send-command-with-context}
@item @samp{r}
@tab @code{codex-send-region}
@item @samp{o}
@tab @code{codex-send-buffer-file}
@item @samp{I}
@tab @code{codex-send-image}
@item @samp{e}
@tab @code{codex-fix-error-at-point}
@item @samp{/}
@tab @code{codex-slash-commands}
@item @samp{t}
@tab @code{codex-toggle}
@item @samp{b}
@tab @code{codex-switch-to-buffer}
@item @samp{B}
@tab @code{codex-select-buffer}
@item @samp{l}
@tab @code{codex-redraw}
@item @samp{z}
@tab @code{codex-toggle-read-only-mode}
@item @samp{M}
@tab @code{codex-cycle-permissions}
@item @samp{y}
@tab @code{codex-send-return}
@item @samp{n}
@tab @code{codex-send-escape}
@item @samp{E}
@tab @code{codex-edit-previous-message}
@item @samp{TAB}
@tab @code{codex-queue-followup}
@item @samp{1}
@tab @code{codex-send-1}
@item @samp{2}
@tab @code{codex-send-2}
@item @samp{3}
@tab @code{codex-send-3}
@item @samp{m}
@tab @code{codex-transient}
@end multitable

@node Minor mode
@chapter Minor mode

@findex codex-mode

The global minor mode @code{codex-mode} enables the Codex integration.  When activated, it auto-configures the Codex CLI hooks system by ensuring that @code{config.toml} and @code{hooks.json} are set up correctly (@ref{Hooks integration}).  The mode adds a @samp{Codex} lighter to the mode line.

Activate it with:

@lisp
(codex-mode 1)
@end lisp

Or add it to your init file to enable it on startup.

@node Hooks system
@chapter Hooks system

The Codex CLI supports a hooks mechanism that notifies external programs of lifecycle events.  @samp{codex.el} takes advantage of this by shipping a @samp{bin/codex-hook-wrapper} shell script that calls @samp{emacsclient} to relay events back to the Emacs server that enabled @code{codex-mode}.

When @code{codex-enable-hooks} is non-nil and @code{codex-mode} is activated, @samp{codex.el} automatically:

@enumerate
@item
Ensures that @code{config.toml} has @code{codex_hooks = true} under the @code{[features]} section.
@item
Ensures that @code{hooks.json} has entries for all six supported hook types: @code{Stop}, @code{SessionStart}, @code{PreToolUse}, @code{PermissionRequest}, @code{PostToolUse}, and @code{UserPromptSubmit}.
@end enumerate

Each hook entry points to the @samp{codex-hook-wrapper} script, which reads JSON from stdin into a private temporary file and asks @samp{emacsclient} to pass that file to @code{codex-handle-hook}.  Existing user-defined hooks in @code{hooks.json} are preserved; @samp{codex.el} appends its own entries if they are absent and repairs them if their matcher, command, type, or timeout drifts.

You can respond to these events by adding functions to @code{codex-event-hook} (@ref{Emacs hooks}).

@node Indices
@chapter Indices

@menu
* Function index::
* Variable index::
@end menu

@node Function index
@section Function index

@printindex fn

@node Variable index
@section Variable index

@printindex vr

@bye
